SEPTEMBER 15th, JOHN KERRY
TRAVELS TO ISRAEL TO OFFER
REASSURE PERHAPS ABOUT THE
SYRIAN CHEMICAL WEAPONS DEAL
>>> IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT
DOES THIS TINY COASTAL TOWN IN
MAINE HOLD THE KEY TO AMERICA'
RENEWABLE ENERGY FUTURE?
>> WE HAVE KNOWN FOR CENTURIES
WHEN THE TIDES WERE COMING AND
GOING.
SO WE CAN TELL YOU ON, YOU KNOW,
THIS DAY 20 YEARS FROM NOW, AT
THIS MOMENT, HOW MUC
ELECTRICITY WILL BE GENERATED.
>>> AND FIVE YEARS LATER, AR
SYSTEMS IN PLACE TO PREVEN
ANOTHER FINANCIAL MELT DOWN?
NEXT ON PBS NEWS HOUR WEEKEND.
>>> GOOD EVENING, THANKS FOR
JOINING US
FRESH OFF HIS ANNOUNCEMENT
YESTERDAY ABOUT AN AGREEMENT
REQUIRING SYRIA TO DESTROY ITS
ENTIRE STOCKPILE OF CHEMICAL
WEAPONS BY THE MIDDLE OF NEX
YEAR, SECRETARY OF STATE JOH
KERRY WAS IN JERUSALEM TODAY
OFFERING ISRAELI PRIME MINISTE
BENJAMIN NETANYAU ASSURANCES
THAT THE UNITED STATES WIL
INSIST ON FULL COMPLIANCE BY
BASHAR AL ASSAD'S REGIME
>> THE THREAT OF FORCE IS REAL
AND THE ASSAD REGIME AND ALL
THOSE TAKING PART NEED T
UNDERSTAND THAT PRESIDENT OBAM
AND THE UNITED STATES AR
COMMITTED TO ACHIEVE THIS GOAL
>> NETANYAHU SAID ISRAEL ALS
WOULD INSIST ON ACTIONS AN
RESULTS, NOT WORDS
>> THE SYRIAN REGIME MUST BE
STRIPPED OF ALL ITS CHEMICAL
WEAPONS AND THAT WOULD MAKE OU
ENTIRE REGION A LOT SAFER.
>> IN AN INTERVIEW BROADCAST O
ABC TODAY, PRESIDENT OBAMA SAI
HE HAD PRESSED RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN TO END HI
SUPPORT FOR ASSAD.
>> WHAT I'VE ALSO SAID TO HI
DIRECTLY IS THAT WE BOTH HAVE AN
INTEREST IN PREVENTING CHAOS
WITH HE BOTH HAVE AN INTEREST IN
PREVENTING TERRORISM
THE SITUATION IN SYRIA RIGHT NOW
IS UNTENABLE
AS LONG AS MR. ASSAD IS IN
POWER, THERE'S GOING TO BE SOM
SORT OF CONFLICT THERE
>> FOR ALL THE TALK TODAY ABOU
SYRIA, ISRAELI OFFICIALS BELIEVE
THE BIGGER THREAT TO THEIR
COUNTRY COMES FROM IRAN'
GROWING NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
THAT'S BEEN VERY MUCH ON THE
MINDS OF ISRAELIS THIS WEEK AS
THE CRISIS OVER SYRIA UNFOLDED
"NEWSHOUR" SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MARTIN FLETCHER REPORTS FROM
ISRAEL
>> Reporter: FOR ISRAEL, SYRIA
IS REALLY A FOUR-LETTER WORD
IRAN
THAT WAS PRIME MINISTE
NETANYAHU'S MESSAGE TO NEW NAV
OFFICERS LAST WEEK AND T
PRESIDENT OBAMA.
SPEAKING OF SYRIA'S CHEMICAL
WEAPONS, HE SAID, "THE WORLD
MUST MAKE SURE THAT WHOEVER USES
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION PAYS
A PRICE FOR IT
THE MESSAGE THAT IS RECEIVED I
SYRIA," HE SAID YOU" WILL BE
RECEIVED LOUDLY IN IRAN.
HERE, EVERY MOVE THAT PRESIDEN
OBAMA MAKES ON SYRIA IS SEEN
THROUGH THE PRISM CAN ISRAEL
TRUST OBAMA TO STOP IRAN'S
NUCLEAR WEAPONS PROGRAM?
IT'S ESPECIALLY RELEVANT THI
WEEKEND, THE 40th AN VERSE O
THE 1973 YOM KIPPUR WAR WHEN
SYRIA AND EGYPT LAUNCHED A
SURPRISE ATTACK AGAINST ISRAEL
THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT BACK THEN
ORDERED WEAPON AIRLIFT THA
HELPED SAVE THE JEWISH STATE
BASED ON PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
HANDLING OF THE SYRIAN CRISIS,
HOW CONFIDENT ARE ISRAEL
OFFICIALS NOW THAT HE WILL STO
IRAN FROM MAKING NUCLEAR WEAPON?
SHIMON SHE HAVER IS AN ISRAELI
POLITICAL REPORTER
>> THEY ARE NOT GOING TO ATTAC
PRESIDENT OBAMA.
>> WHAT DO THEY SAY IN PRIVATE
>> IN PRIVATE, THEY ARE SAYING
THE LESSON FROM THE WAY THAT H
DEALT WITH SYRIAN ISSUE, IT IS
VERY DIFFICULT FOR ISRAEL.
A LOT OF POLICYMAKERS,
MINISTERS, THEY WILL TELL YOU IN
PRIVATE THAT AFTER ALL, ISRAEL
WILL HAVE TO DEAL UNILATERALLY
TO STOP THE NUCLEAR EFFORT O
IRAN TO BECOME A COUNTRY WITH
NUCLEAR POWER.
>> Reporter: IN RECENT WEEKS
ISRAELI CITIZENS PREPARE FOR A
POSSIBLE AMERICAN ATTACK O
SYRIA THAT THEY FEARED WOULD
PROVOKE A SYRIAN ATTACK ON THEIR
COUNTRY.
HOME FRONT STATIONS GAVE OUT
THOUSANDS OF GASSING MASKS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY AND HIS REA
RUSHED ITS IRON DOME ANTI-ROCKET
DEFENSE SYSTEMS INTO PLACE
THERE IS JERUSALEM IN TH
DISTANCE, IT WAS PROTECTED B
ISRAEL'S IRON DOME FACTORY RIGHT
HERE BUT THE SAME DAY PRESIDEN
OBAMA WENT ON NATIONAL TV AN
ACCEPTED THE RUSSIANS'
INITIATIVE FOR A DIPLOMATI
SOLUTION TO SYRIA, THE ISRAELI
REMOVED THE IRON DOME PROM THI
POSITION
NOTHING SAYS MORE CLEARLY TH
DROP IN TENSION.
THIS TEL AVIV STORE HOUSE, GAS
MASK HANDOUT HAS SLOWED TO A
TRICKLE.
DIPLOMACY FLOWS FROM THE CRISI
AND THERE IS A NEW INITIATIV
UNDER WAY FROM IRAN TO RESOLVE
NUCLEAR ISSUE PIECEFULLY
IRAN ANNOUNCED IT CUT IT
STOCKPILE OF 20% ENRICHE
URANIUM BY HALF.
>> THERE HAS TO BE A
NEGOTIATION.
>> Reporter: THE FORMER ISRAEL
AMBASSADOR TO THE U.N. -
>> THERE HAS TO BE ALLOWING IRAN
TO CLIMB OFF THE TREE.
IT COULD WORK AND THERE COULD BE
A DIPLOMATIC SOLUTION BU
WITHOUT THE CREDIBLE THREAT OF
MILITARY ACTION, THE IRANIAN
WILL NOT COLLABORATE IN
DIPLOMATIC SOLUTION.
>> Reporter: NETANYAHU
STRESSEDER WHY THEY ARE WEEK
ISRAEL MUST KNOW HOW TO DEFEND
ITSELF
>> IN A WAY, EXACTING PRESSURE
ON OBAMA, INDICATING THAT IF THE
UNITED STATES DOESN'T DO WHA
THE UNITED STATES UNDERTOOK TO
DO ISRAEL MIGHT HAVE TO DO
ITSELF
THIS THAT PRESSURE NEEDS TO BE
THERE HAS TO BE AN AMERICA
PRESSURE ON IRAN AND THERE HAS
TO BE AN ISRAELI PRESSURE ON
AMERICA.
>>> BACK IN THE U.S., RESCUE
EFFORTS CONTINUE IN COLORADO
AFTER DAYS OF RAIN CAUSE
MASSIVE FLOODING
AT LEAST SIX PEOPLE ARE PRESUMED
DEAD AND MORE THAN 700 ARE
UNACCOUNTED FOR.
ANOTHER 2,000 HAVE BEE
EVACUATED FROM THEIR HOMES
MORE RAIN TODAY CROWNEDED RESCUE
HELICOPTERS.
POSSIBLE SHOWERS ARE IN TH
FORECAST FOR TOMORROW.
>>> IN BIRMINGHAM, ALABAMA
SERVICES TO COMMEMORATE THE 50th
ANNIVERSARY OF THE 1963 CHURCH
BOMBING THAT KILLED FOUR
TEENAGED GIRLS
HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE, BOTH BLACK
AND WHITE, GATHER TED 16th
STREET BAPTIST CHURCH TO MAR
THE CONVENIENT
THERE WAS ALSO A WREATH-LAYING
SERVICE.
AMONG THOSE IN ATTENDANCE WERE
ERIC HOLDER, THE NATION'S FIRS
AFRICAN-AMERICAN ATTORNE
GENERAL, AND CONDOLEEZZA RICE.
AT THE TIME OF THE BOMBING, SH
WAS 8 YEARS OLD AND A PLAYMATE
OF ONE OF THE VICTIMS.
REVULSION OVER THE BOMBING I
WIDELY BELIEVED TO HAVE LED TO
PASSABLE OF THE 1964 CIVIL
RIGHTS ACT THAT OUTLAWED
DISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF
RACE YOU ETHNICITY OR GENDER
>>> FROM WASHINGTON, WORD THAT
FORMER TREASURY SECRETAR
LAWRENCE SUMMERS HAS WITHDRAWN
FROM CONSIDERATION TO SUCCEE
BEN BERNANKE, AS CHAIRMAN OF THE
FED RESERVE.
"THE WALL STREET JOURNAL," WHICH
BROKE THE STORY, SAID SUMMER
MADE HIS WISHES KNOWN TO
PRESIDENT OBAMA IN A TELEPHONE
CALL AND THEN A LONG-TERM HE
SAID HE HAD DECIDED HI
CONFIRMATION HEARINGS WOULD BE
TOO ACRIMONIOUS.
>>> BACK OVERSEAS TODAY,
PHILIPPINE ARMY TROOPS AND
POLICE SPECIAL FORCES LAUNCHED
AN OFFENSIVE AGAINST MUSLI
REBELS STILL HOLDING DOES OF
HOSTAGES IN THE SOUTHERN PART OF
THAT COUNTRY
AT LEAST 50 REBELS AND SIX
POLICEMEN AND SOLDIERS HAVE BEEN
KILLED
THE CONFRONTATION BEGAN MONDAY
WHEN THE REBELS TOOK MORE THAN
100 PEOPLE HOSTAGE AND USED THEM
AS HUMAN SHIELDS
SEVERAL OF THE HOSTAGES HAVE
SINCE ESCAPED.
IT IS PART OF A LONG-TER
CONFLICT BETWEEN REBELS SEEKIN
AUTONOMY FOR THE LARGELY MUSLI
REGION IN THE SOUTH AND TH
GOVERNMENT OF THE PREDOMINANTL
CATHOLIC NATION.
>>> THERE HAS BEEN STILL MOR
VIOLENCE IN IRAQ
AUTHORITIES SAY AT LEAST 5
PEOPLE WERE KILLED TODAY IN
WAVE OF BOMBINGS IN MOSTLY
SHIITE MUSLIM CITIES SOUTH O
BAGHDAD N ONE INCIDENT, A PARKED
CAR RIGGED WITH EXPLOSIVES WEN
OFF, KILLING FOUR PEOPLE AND
WOUNDING ANOTHER 25.
AT LEAST NINE PEOPLE WERE KILL
AND ANOTHER 15 WOUNDED IN
SEPARATE INCIDENT WHEN A CAR
BOMB EXPLODED IN AN OUTDOO
MARKET
ALSO, ACCORDING TO THE UNITE
NATIONS, 800 IRAQIS DIED I
SECTARIAN VIOLENCE LAST MONTH,
THE WORST SURGE OF VIOLENCE IN
FIVE YEARS
SUNNI MUSLIMS ARE ANGERED BY
WHAT THEY CONSIDER THEIR
MISTREATMENT AT THE HANDS OF THE
SHIITE-LED GOVERNMENT.
>>> OFFICIALS ARE HOURS AWAY
FROM TRYING TO RAISE THE
CRIPPLED 115,000-TON "COST
CONCORDIA" CRUISE LINER.
AS YOU RECALL, THE VESSE
CAPSIZED IN JANUARY OF 201
AFTER STRIKING A REEF OFF TH
WEST COAST OF ITALY.
32 PASSENGERS AND CREW MEMBERS
DIED
DIVERS WERE NEVER ABLE T
RECOVER TWO BODIES POSSIBL
LYING UNDER THE WRECKAGE
ENGINEERS WILL TRY TO GET TH
PARTIALLY SUBMERGED SHIP UPRIGHT
USING CRANK-LIKE PULLIES AND
TANKS FILLED WITH WATER F IT ALL
WORKS, THE SHIP WILL BE TOWE
AWAY, BROKEN UP AND SOLD A
SCRAP.
ENVIRONMENTALISTS WARN THAT IF
THE PLAN GOES AWRY, TOXI
SUBSTANCES COULD LEAD INTO THE
SEA.
>>> AN IMPORTANT CLARIFICATION
YOU LAST SUNDAY, WE REPORTED
THAT COLUMBIA, SOUTH CAROLINA,
WAS MOVING AHEAD ON PLAN T
ARREST THE HOMELESS UNLESS THE
LEFT THE DOWNTOWN SHOPPING AREA.
IN FACT, THE CITY REVERSED
COURSE AND ABANDONED THE IDE
BEFORE OUR REPORT AIRED.
WE REGRET THE ERROR.
>>> NOW ON TO OUR SIGNATUR
SEGMENT, OUR IN-DEPTH REPORT
ABOUT IMPORTANT BU
UNDERREPORTED STORIES HERE A
HOME AND OVERSEAS.
WHEN YOU CONSIDER THIS COUNTRY'S
ENERGY FUTURE, YOU MIGHT THINK
OF FRACING OR RENEWABLE SOURCE
LIKE WIND OR SOLAR BUT THE
POTENTIAL POWER FROM WATER I
ENORMOUS YOU CAN NOT ONLY FROM
DAMS BUT NEW TECHNOLOGIES THAT
HARNESS THE POWER OF WAVES AND
TIDES.
RIGHT NOW THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
IS SUPPORTING THE FIRS
COMMERCIAL PROJECT TO EXPLOI
TIDAL ENERGY
THE EFFORT IS UNDER WAY IN A
AREA NOUN AS DOWN EAST YOU
MAINE, AT THE MOUTH OF THE BAY
OF FUNDY IT HAS SOME OF TH
WORLD'S HIGHEST TIDES.
"NEWSHOUR" CORRESPONDENT TRAVE
THERE HAD RECENTLY AND EX-BLOORS
MAYBE THE START OF A SMALL
ENERGY REVOLUTION.
>> Reporter: THE SUNRISESER AN
EAST PORT, MAINE, THE MOST
EASTERN CITY IN THE UNITED
STATES
WHILE THE STREETS ARE QUIET,
FISHING BOATS SET OUT FOR TH
DAY AND RELIABLY, THESE MASSIV
TIDES ARE FLOWING IN AND OUT
JUST AS THEY HAVE TWICE A DA
YOU EVERY DAY, FOR THOUSANDS O
YEARS.
IT IS THAT FACT, PREDICTABILITY,
THAT THE PEOPLE OF MAINE
BELIEVES TO CHANGE
>> THE TIDES ARE TOTALLY
PREDICTABLE, KNOWN FOR CENTURIES
WHEN THE TIDES ARE COMING AN
GOING.
>> Reporter: THE EXECUTIVE O
THE OCEAN RENEWABLE POWE
COMPANY AFTER FIVE YEARS O
PLANNING INSTALLED AN UNDERWATER
TURBINE 2200 FEET FROM THE
SHORE.
IT TURNS THE TIDES INTO CLEAN,
RENEWABLE ENERGY
>> WE CAN TELL YOU ON THIS DAY
20 YEARS FROM NOW AT THIS MOMENT
HOW MUCH ELECTRICITY WILL BE
GENERATING
>> Reporter: IT IS A $21 MILLION
PROJECT FUNDED ALMOST EQUALL
BETWEEN PRIVATE AND PUBLIC
SOURCES.
AND IT'S THE FIRST COMMERCIA
TIDAL ENERGY PROJECT DELIVERIN
POWER TO THE GRID ANYWHERE I
THE U.S.
>> UNLIKE WIND OR SOLAR WHER
YOU KNOW, YOU MAY GET A CLOU
THAT COMES OVER AND YOU HAVE
THESE HUGE SWINGS OR YOU HAVE
BIG GUST OF WIND, WE DON'T HAV
THAT UNDER THE OCEAN
>> Reporter: THE UNIT IS NEARL
100 FEET LONG AND 60 FEET BELO
THE WATER'S SURFACE.
THE TURBINES ARE SHAPED LIKE
STRETCHED OUT AND TWISTED WATE
WHEELS AND THEY WORK ON THE SAME
PRINCIPLE.
AS THE TIDE COMES AND GOES, TH
TURBINE SPINS, GENERATIN
ELECTRICITY, WHICH IS THEN
TRANSMITTED THROUGH A BURIED
POWER CABLE TO A SMALL ONSHORE
STATION 400 FEET INLAND.
AND FROM THERE, IT'S FED TO TH
PUBLIC ELECTRICAL GRID
SO, WHEN YOU'RE LOOKING OUT ON
THE BAY, WHAT DO YOU SEE
>> YOU SEE ABSOLUTELY NOTHING.
THE VIEW AFTER IS EXACTLY TH
SAME AS THE VIEW BEFORE.
EVERYTHING IS BELOW WATER, THE
EQUIPMENT IS BELOW WATER, THER
ARE MARKER BUOYS FOR THE PROJECT
AREA, BUT OTHER THAN THAT YO
DON'T SEE ANYTHING
>> WHAT DO YOU THINK THE
POTENTIAL OF THIS IS
REALISTICALLY?
>> WE KNOW THIS WORKS.
AS WE IMPROVE THE TECHNOLOGY, WE
ARE TALKING 10, 15, 20 YEARS
DOWN THE ROAD, THERE WILL BE
APPLICATIONS FOR THIS TECHNOLOGY
VIRTUALLY IN EVERY STATE IN TH
COUNTRY.
BECAUSE THE TECHNOLOGY DOESN'T
JUST APPLY TO TIDAL, IT APPLIE
RIVERS AND OFFSHORE OCEA
CURRENT SUCH AS THE GULF
STREAMS.
>> TODAY, POWER FROM WATER COMES
ALMOST ENTIRELY FROM DAMS,
PROVIDING NEARLY 7% OF THE
COUNTRY'S ELECTRICITY NEEDS.
THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERG
ESTIMATES THAT NUMBER WILL MOR
THAN DOUBLE BY THE YEAR 2030
RISING TO 15%.
AND THE POTENTIAL IS EVE
GREATER THAN THAT.
>> A THIRD OF OUR NATION'S
ELECTRICITY COULD POTENTIALL
COME FROM OCEAN ENERGY
>> SO A THIRD, I MEAN, THAT'
BIG DEAL, RIGHT?
>> IT IS
IT IS A BIG DEAL
>> Reporter: THE DIRECTOR OF THE
WIND AND WATER POWER
TECHNOLOGY'S OFFICE AT THE
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
HOW REALISTIC IS IT THAT THESE
NEW TECHNOLOGIES, LIKE TIDAL
POWER, CAN BECOME A SIZABLE PART
OF OUR ENERGY PRODUCTION
>> WE THINK ABOUT THE COUNTRY AS
A WHOLE, 50% OF OUR PEOPLE LIV
NEAR WATER
A SIGNIFICANT AMOUNT OF PEOPLE
WE THINK ABOUT THE LARGEST
CITIES AROUND THE COUNTRY, THERE
ALSO TEND TO BE CLOSE TO THE
WATER, OKAY?
IF WE CONTINUE DOWN A TRAJECTORY
WHERE WE REDUCED THE COST OF
THESE TECHNOLOGIES, YOU CAN HAVE
A SIGNIFICANT IMPACT ON TH
LOCAL ENERGY DEMANDS OF THAT
PARTICULAR REGION OR STATE
>> THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HA
INVESTED NEARLY $116 MILLION I
DOZENS OF WHAT ARE CALLED HYDR
KINETIC WATER POWER PROJECTS I
THE PAST SIX YEARS
THEY INCLUDE A PIRATE PROJECT TO
CONNECT WITH THE WATER IN NE
YORK, A BUOY SYSTEM TO TUR
ENERGY INTO ELECTRICITY THIS
OREGON AND OCEAN POWER COMPANY'S
TIDAL TURBINE IN MAINE, WI
ENERGY DEPARTMENT INVESTED $10
MILLION IN
RIGHT NOW YOU IT ONLY PRODUC
ITS ENOUGH ELECTRICITY FOR 2
HOMES.
WHY IS THIS A GOOD USE O
TAXPAYER MONEY
>> RECOGNIZE THAT THE FIRS
PIONEERING KINDS OF PROJECTS ARE
COMPLICATED.
YOU'RE REALLY BREAKING NEW
GROUND AND I THINK THAT ORPC HAS
PAVED THE BEGINNINGS OF THE ROAD
FOR THIS INDUSTRY.
>> THE ONE TURBINE YOU HAV
RIGHT NOW IS POWERING 25 HOMES
>> IT GENERATES ENOUGH POWER I
THE YEAR TO POWER 25 HOMES
THAT'S CORRECT
>> WHICH IS VERY SMALL
>> THAT'S SMALL.
THAT'S RIGHT
YOU NEED TO START SMALL.
THERE WILL BE BREAKTHROUGHS THAT
COME THROUGH, WE ALREADY HAV
BIGGER UNITS PLANNED AND THE
SECRET HERE IS IN REPLICATION.
SO THE DRILL WE ARE GOIN
THROUGH IS HOW DO WE MAKE IT
MORE EFFICIENT AND HOW DO WE
MAKE IT SIGNIFICANTLY CHEAPER?
HOW DO WE MAKE IT COMPETITIVE?
>> IT'S NOT COMPETITIVE NOW.
THE ELECTRICITY GENERATED BY THE
TIDAL TURBINE COSTS ABOUT THRE
TIMES AS MUCH AS EAST PORT'S
OTHER ENERGY SOURCES AND COS
SUSPECT THE ONLY OBSTACLE.
THERE ARE ALSO CONCERNS ABOU
THE IMPACT ON FISH, SEA MAMMALS,
EVEN MIGRATORY BIRDS
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT PLACING A
90,000-POUND, 100-FOOT-LON
TURBINE INTO THE OCEAN
YOU TELL ME THERE IS NO IMPACT
ON THE ENVIRONMENT
>> WE -- WE DO EXTENSIVE
MONITORING AND THE BOTTOM LINE
IS THAT THERE IS NO KNOW
IMPACTS TO THE MARIN
ENVIRONMENT.
>> Reporter: CONVINCING LOCA
RESIDENTS OF THAT WAS VITA
BECAUSE THE REGION'S ECONOMY
DEPENDS ON THE WATER
DAVE MAR RANG IS A LOCAL COOK.
>> OVER THE SITE, 15 AGES,
AROUND 30,000 FISH IN EACH ONE
OF THOSE CAGES
THEY'VE GOOD LIFE.
>> Reporter: SALMON FARMING,
COMMERCIAL FISHING, SHIPPING AND
TOURISM IS THE BIGGEST EMPLOYERS
IN THE AREA N A COUNTY WITH TH
STATE'S HIGHEST UNEMPLOYMENT
RATE OF 9.3%, MANY WERE DEEPLY
CONCERNED ABOUT ANYTHING THA
COULD HARM BUSINESS.
>> WELL, IT WAS KIND OF -- I
WAS KIND OF FUNNY.
A FRIEND OF MINE, HE COME AN
SEEN ME AND TOLD ME WHAT THE
WANTED TO DO AND I -- YOU KNOW
MY FIRST REACTION, WANT TO D
WHAT
>> Reporter: BUT IN THE SI
YEARS SINCE THE TIDAL PROJEC
BEGAN, MAR RANG SAYS IT HASN'T
BEEN DISRUPTIVE.
IN SAYS, IT HAS BEEN A BOONE T
THE LOCAL ECONOMY.
>> THEY HAVE COME IN AND THE
HAVE HIRED PEOPLE.
LIKE, YOU GONNA TAKE FIVE JOBS
IN EAST PORT EQUAL TO 50 JOBS IN
A CITY LIKE BANGOR, MAINE.
YOU KNOW, EVERY JOB COUNTS
AROUND HERE.
>> Reporter: THE COMPANY HAS
INVESTED $5 MILLION IN THE AREA,
OPENING A LOCAL OFFICE AND
HIRING DOZENS OF LOCAL
CONTRACTORS, FOR EVERYTHING FROM
HARBOR PILOTS TO CONSTRUCTIO
DIVERS
AND THE HOPE IS THAT THE PROJECT
WILL GENERATE MORE JOBS DURING
THE NEXT FIVE YEARS.
THE COMPANY IS PLANNING ON
INSTALLING 18 ADDITIONAL
TURBINES, EVENTUALLY POWERING UP
TO 2,000 HOMES
TO THAT EFFORT, THE U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY ANNOUNCED
$5 BILLION IN ADDITIONAL GRANTS.
>> DOING STUFF NEVER DON
BEFORE, LIKE TO KID OUR PEOPLE
WE DON'T HAVE ANY OPERATION MA
USE.
I WISH COULD I SAY THAT TH
JOURNEY IS NEARING AN END, BUT
IT IS ACTUALLY JUST BEGINNING.
>>> LEARN ABOUT THE HUGE PUBLI
WORKS PROJECT THAT FDR TRIED T
CREATE IN EAST PORT, MAINE
ALMOST 80 YEARS AGO.
VISIT "NEWSHOUR."PBS.ORG
>>> THIS IS THE FIFT
ANNIVERSARY OF THE COLLAPSE OF
LEHMAN BROTHERS, THE BIGGEST
BANKRUPTCY IN AMERICAN HISTORY
THAT CONVENIENT HELPED TRIGGER
THE GREATEST ECONOMIC CRISIS I
THE UNITED STATES SINCE TH
GREAT DEPRESSION
HAVE WE TAKEN ADEQUATE STEPS T
PREVENT A RECURRENCE
MORE ABOUT THAT WE ARE JOINED IN
OUR STUDIO BY HEIDI MOORE, A
FINANCE AND ECONOMICS EDITOR FOR
THE GUARDIAN NEWSPAPER BASED I
NEW YORK
WHAT HAVE WE DONE SO FAR T
PREVENT ANOTHER BANKING COLLAPSE
LIKE WE SAW?
>> WE FLAILED A BIT.
WE HAVE DONE THINGS SUPPOSED T
PREVENT ANOTHER BANKING COLLAPSE
LIKE PASSION THE DODD FRANK ACT,
AN OMNIBUS REGULATION BILL
SUPPOSED TO PREVENT WALL STREE
FROM BECOMING TOO BIG TO FAIL.
AND THAT REALLY HAS BEEN KIND OF
THE MAJOR EFFORT THAT HA
HAPPENED THERE, WERE OF COURSE
THE BAILOUTS AT THE TIME, TARP
BAILOUT AND THERE WAS TH
QUANTITATIVE EASING STIMULUS B
THE FED WHICH IS ALSO A RESULT
OF THE CRISIS AT THAT TIME
>> THINGS WE SAID HE WOULD DO TO
PREVENT THIS WE HAVEN'T DONE
YET.
>> YES, A LOT.
YOU CAN LOOK AT TODAY FRANK VERY
SPECIFICALLY, HUNDREDS OF RULE
ONE DODD FRANK LEFT UNDONE
PASSED IN A HURRY IN 2009 IN A
VERY EMOTIONAL TIME AND IT WAS
ESSENTIALLY A VERY LONG TO DO,
LIST, 900 PAGE TO-DO LIST,
ALMOST ALL LEFT UNDONE, GOOD
THINGS WE HAVE DONE, CREATE TH
CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTIO
BUREAU AND ALSO CREATE THE
COUNCIL OF 14 REGULATORS THA
MEET ABOUT ONCE A MONTH.
ONLY SUPPOSED TO MEET ONCE A
QUARTER AND TALK ABOUT WHAT'
GOING ON IN REGULATION AND
ISSUES YOU ARE FACING.
THERE ARE TWO THINGS THAT CAME
OUT OF IT.
IT IS CALLED THE VOLCKER
RULE, SUPPOSED TO BE ONE OF TH
LYNCH PINS OF HOW WE WERE GOIN
TO CHANGE THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
THAT IS NOWHERE.
IT IS MIRED IN BUREAUCRACY
>> BECAUSE -- WHY ARE TH
REGULATIONS NOT EFFECTIVE?
>> THEY ARE NOT EFFECTIV
LARGELY BECAUSE THERE IS NO ON
PUSHING THEM FORWARD
WALL STREET HAS GOTTEN ITS CLAWS
INTO IT.
WE KNOW WALL STREET AS A MONEY
MAKING ENTERPRISE BUT ALSO A
LOBBYING ENTERPRISE AND THOS
LOBBYISTS ARE THE ONES WHO KNO
THE FINANCIAL SECTOR BEST AN
THEY ADVISE CONGRESS ON HOW TO
WRITE RULES.
ONE RULE CONCERNING DERIVATIVES,
85 LINES IN IT 75 WRITTEN BY
CITIGROUP LOBBYISTS, PART OF THE
ISSUE IS THAT WALL STREET HAS
LOT OF INFLUENCE OVER THE RULE
WRITING PROCESS AND THEY ARE
INVESTED AND MAKING IT WEAKER,
THE OTHER SIDE OF IT IS THAT W
HAVE TOO LITTLE ENFORCEMENT.
THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANG
COMMISSION AND OTHER REGULATOR
ARE PERPETUALLY UNDERFUNDED AN
ALSO FACING PRESSURE FROM WALL
STREET TO WEAKEN THEIR EFFORTS
AND THEIR PROSECUTIONS ARE VER
RARELY SUCCESSFUL.
>> IS IT ACCURATE FOR SOME O
THESE CRITICS TO SAY PERHAPS W
NEED TO DO A BETTER JOB OF
ENFORCING THE LAWS ON THE BOOK
AS OPPOSED TO WRITING ENTIRELY
NEW SOMEONE IN
>> WE DO NEED BETTER LAWS AN
NEW LAWS ONLY BECAUSE TH
FINANCIAL SYSTEM IS BECOMING
MORE AND MORE COMPLEX.
AND WRITING LAWS ALLOWS US T
COMPLEX AND TO REIN IN THA
COMPLEXITY OR AT LEAST REGULAT
IT, BUT IT'S TRUE THAT WE ALSO
DON'T ENFORCE VERY WELL WHAT W
ALREADY HAVE
A LOT OF REGULATORS JUST AREN'
INCENTIVIZED TO FIND WRONGDOING.
WE HAVE A WRISTLE BROTHER RULE
THAT'S PART OF DODD FRANK THAT
STILL HASN'T BEEN FINALIZED.
YOU HAVE THE STRUCTURAL ISSU
THAT A LOT OF REGULATORS ARE
PAID $50,000, $80,000, MAYBE
$100,000 A YEAR BUT THE BANKER
THAT THEY ARE REGULATING ARE
BEING PAID MILLIONS OF DOLLARS
YEAR
SO THERE IS A CLASS SYSTEM
QUITE LITERALLY A CLAS
HIERARCHY IN WALL STREET
REGULATION
>> HOW BIG A THREAT TO DO WE
FACE
>> A PRETTY BIG THREAT
AS WITH LAST TIME, WE DON'T KNOW
WHAT IT S LAST TIME, WE WERE
BLIND SIDED BY THE MORTGAG
CRISIS YOU EVEN THOUGH THERE
WERE A FEW ORACLES WHO SAID THEY
PREDICTED IT, NO ONE COULD HAV
PREDICTED THAT THE ECONOMY COULD
BE SO BAD THAT INCOME INEQUALITY
WOULD BED A BAD AS IT IS
ECONOMIC RECOVERY STUMBLED
ALONG, ALMOST THE STAGNATION N
ONE PREDICTED THAT, WE WON'T SEE
THAT COMING NEXT TIME EITHER BUT
IT'S WORTH IT FOR REGULATORS T
TAKE A LOOK AT ASSETS THAT ARE
PRICED WAY TOO HIGH, RELATIVE TO
WHAT THEY ARE A WORTH.
>> HEIDI MOORE
THANKS SO MUCH
>> THANK YOU
>>> THE CONVERSATION ABOUT THE
2008 FINANCIAL CRISIS CONTINUE
TOMORROW ON THE "NEWSHOUR,
INTERVIEW WITH THE MAN WHO HEA
UP THE TREASURY DEPARTMENT BAC
THEN, HENRY PAULSON.
>>> FINALLY, THE CONNECTION,
TONIGHT, A FEW LIVES REMEMBE
FROM THE CIVIL RIGHTS ERA.
THEY WOULD HAVE BEEN IN THEI
EARLY 60s NOW, GRANDMOTHER
PERHAPS, MAYBE NEARING THE END
OF THEIR CAREERS OR ENJOYING
RETIREMENT
INSTEAD, DENISE McNAIR, CARO
ROBERTSON, ADDIE MAE COLLINS AND
SIP THEE YA WESLEY WERE KILLED
50 YEARS AGO TODAY IN ONE OF THE
WORST ACTS OF VIOLENCE DURIN
THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT.
THEY DIED ON A SUNDAY MORNING,
THE CHURCH THEY ATTENDED, TH
16th STREET BAPTIST CHURCH I
BIRMINGHAM, ALABAMA, WAS BOMBED.
THIS RECOLLECTION IS FROM A NE
DOCUMENTARY CALLED PRESERVIN
JUSTICE.
>> MY TEACHER, MS. WESLEY, HER
DAUGHTER WAS ONE OF THE ONES
KILLED IN THAT CHURCH BOMBINGS
CYNTHIA WESLEY, AND I COUL
REMEMBER SEEING HER STANDING O
THE STOOP OUTSIDE THE EMERGENC
ROOM CRYING.
>> THIS MAN SURVIVED THOSE VER
DANGEROUS TIMES, EVEN THOUGH H
WAS A CIVIL RIGHTS ATTORNEY WH
WORKED WITH ROSA PARKS AND DR.
MARTIN LUTHER KING JR.
HIS NAME WAS DEMETRIUS NEWTO
AND HE WAS INTERVIEWED FOR THE
SAME DOCUMENTARY
>> I SAW TWO WHITE POLIC
OFFICERS MANHANDLE A YOUNG BLIND
GIRL THAT I KNEW AND I THINK I
WAS THE CATALYST THAT PERHAP
LED ME TO CHOOSE A CAREER.
>> LATER, NEWTON BECAME TH
FIRST AFRICAN-AMERICAN TO SERV
AS PRESIDENT PRO TEM OF TH
ALABAMA HOUSE.
HE DIED AGE OF 85 EARLIER THIS
WEEK
50 YEARS AFTER THAT CHURCH
BOMBING, HE WAS FONDLY
REMEMBERED BY BOTH BLACK AND
WHITE ALABAMANS.
AND THOSE FOUR GIRLS WHO LIVED
SUCH TERRIBLY SHORT LIVES WERE
REMEMBERED THROUGHOU
BIRMINGHAM
THIS MORNING, BELLS TOLLED A
10:22, THE TIME THE BOMB
EXPLODED
AND THE SUNDAY SCHOOL LESSON
THAT WAS INTERRUPTED THAT DA
WAS READ FROM START TO FINISH.
>>> ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TOMORROW
ON AIR AND ONLINE, WE KICK OFF A
THREE-PART SERIES ON HOW CLIMATE
CHANGE IS ALTERING LIFE IN THE
ARCTIC
AND FIVE YEARS AFTER THE FALL OF
LEHMAN BROTHERS, WE SIT DOWN
WITH FORMER TREASURY SECRETARY
HENRY PAULSON.
RECAP OUR LEAD STORY, JOHN KERRY
TRAVELS TO ISRAEL TO OFFER
REASSURANCES ABOUT THE SYRIA
CHEMICAL WEAPONS DEAL THAT'S I
FOR THIS EDITION OF PB
"NEWSHOUR" WEEKEND
THANKS FOR WATCHING.